$Id$

Table of Contents
-----------------
  1.   Introduction
  2    Usage
  3.   Program Parameters
  3.   Contact
  4.   Acknowledgements

1. Introduction
---------------

2. Usage
--------

The distribution makes use of several programs. The first and most important
is 'rmapper'. 'rmapper' performs Smith-Waterman alignments of multiple reads
within one fasta file against a single reftig in another fasta file. Since
many reads are mapped against only one reftig per invocation, rmapper must
be run multiple times against each reftig (and reverse complement) of the
entire genome. The utility 'splittigs' can be used to split a genome file
containing multiple reftigs into individual parts.

Once rmapper has been run, the standard output format of all alignments
should be parsed via the 'probcalc' program. This code analyses all
alignment output, saving the top 'n' matches per read, and calculates the
probability of the match being bad. A threshold removes all outputs with a
sufficiently high p-value.

The output produced by the 'probcalc' utility is essentially a subset of
the input, but with an added p-value field. These matches may then have
their full alignments printed using the 'probcalc' utility.

3. Program Parameters
---------------------

'rmapper' takes a variety of parameters, which differ sightly depending on
whether colour-space or letter-space reads are being employed. What follows
is a run-down of these options (in some strange, non-alphabetical order).

	rmapper-cs and rmapper-ls parameters (common parameters):
		[ -s spaced_seed ]

		The spaced seed is a single contiguous string of 0's and 1's.
		0's represent wildcards, or positions which will always be
		considered as matching, whereas 1's dictate positions that must
		match. A string of all 1's will result in a simple kmer scan.

		Note that our implementation creates a hash table based on the
		kmer size (spaced seed 'weight', or number of 1's). Hence
		memory usage increases by a factor of four for each addition
		1. At 16, we're looking at a 32GB hash table allocation for
		32-bit architectures.

		[ -n seed_matches_per_window ]

		The number of seed matches per window dictates how many seeds
		must match within some window length of the genome before that
		region is considered for Smith-Waterman alignment. A lower
		value will increase sensitivity while drastically increasing
		runnig time. Higher values will have the opposite effect.

		[ -t seed_taboo_length ]

		the seed taboo length specifies how many target genome bases
		or colours must exist prior to a previous seed match in order
		to count another seed match as a hit.

		[ -w seed_window_length ]

		This parameter specifies the genomic span in bases (or colours)
		in which 'seed_matches_per_window' must exist before the read
		is given consideration by the Smith-Waterman alignment
		machinery.

		[ -o maximum_hits_per_read ]

		This parameter specifies how many hits to remember for each
		read. If more hits are encountered, ones with lower scores are
		dropped to make room.

		[ -r maximum_read_length ]

		This parameter specifies the maximum length of reads that will
		be encountered in the dataset. If larger reads than the default
		are used, an appropriate value must be passed to 'rmapper'.

		[ -d kmer_std_dev_limit ]

		This option permits pruning read kmers, which occur with
		frequencies greater than 'kmer_std_dev_limit' standard
		deviations above the average. This can shorten running time
		at the cost of some sensitivity.

		NB: A negative value disables this option.

		[ -m sw_match_value ]

		The value applied to matches during the Smith-Waterman score
		calculation.

		[ -i sw_mismatch_value ]

		The value applied to mismatches during the Smith-Waterman score
		calculation.
		
		[ -g sw_gap_open_penalty ]

		The value applied to gap opens during the Smith-Waterman score
		calculation.

		[ -e sw_gap_extend_penalty ]

		The value applied to gap extends during the Smith-Waterman score
		calculation.

		[ -h sw_threshold ]

		NB: This option differs slightly in meaning between letter-space
		    and colour-space.

		In letter-space, this parameter determines the threshold score
		for both vectored and full Smith-Waterman alignments. Any values
		less than this quanitity will be thrown away.

		In colour-space, this parameter affects only the full Smith-
		Waterman alignment, which is performed in letter-space. The
		threshold of the colour-space fast vectored alignment can be
		specified by the -v option. Generally, the -h parameter should
		be stricter (higher) than the -v option, since naive
		colour-space alignments using regular Smith-Waterman suffer
		additionally due to artifacts such as single SNPs resulting in
		two colour mismatches.

		[ -b ]

		This option simply prints a progress bar to stderr during the
		spaced seed scan and vectored Smith-Waterman phases. It exists
		to give a general feel for run-time when testing parameters.
		Since it will probably slow down execution marginally, it is
		not enabled by default and should only be used during manual,
		interactive execution.

		[ -p ]

		'rmapper' has two output formats. The first, and default,
		prints a list of appropriately scoring reads and various
		parameters, such as where they occurred in the genome (index),
		how many matches, mismatches, and gaps there were, and so forth.
		The '-p' flag enables a 'pretty print' output, which displays
		similar parameters, but also a full alignment.

		These alignments can also be obtained after the fact by running
		the default output file through the 'probcalc' program.

	rmapper-cs-specific parameters: 
		[ -x crossover_penalty ]

		This specifies the penalty applied when transitioning between
		Smith-Waterman matricies during the full scan phase. While
		the vectored scan applies to colour-space, the final full
		alignment is done in letter-space. Since each next letter in
		letter-space depends on the previous letter and colour, any
		error on the colour space read will affect all following
		letters when converting to text space. For this reason, we
		must perform our alignment of all four possible letter space
		translations of the read and permit jumping between matricies
		(at the crossover_penalty) cost, when errors occur.

		[ -v sw_vector_hit_threshold ]

		Unlike in letter-space, where the vectored Smith-Waterman and
		full Smith-Waterman alignments are done both in letter-space
		and present identical scores, in colour-space the vectored
		score represents the original colour-space read aligned to
		the colour-space translation of the genome. This will differ
		from the final alignment, which is done purely in letter-space.
		Since the function of the vectored pass exists merely to prune
		insufficiently good alignments and the vectored pass is not a
		true textual alignment, scores for both passes are likely to
		differ. Generally, since a single SNP in letter-space will
		result in two colour changes, the threshold for the colour-space
		alignment should be less than that of letter-space. 

rmapper-ls-specific parameters:
	None for now.

4. Contact
----------

The authors of this software may be contacted at the following e-mail addresses:
	brudno at cs dot toronto dot edu	(Michael Brudno)
	rumble at cs dot toronto dot edu	(Stephen Rumble)

5. Acknowledgements
-------------------

Development was performed at the University of Toronto's Computational
Biology lab in collaboration with the Stanford University Sidow Lab.

The development of this distribution was made possible in part by a
National Engineering and Research Council of Canada Undergraduate Student
Research Award (NSERC USRA).
